Codegen reimplementation for GraphQL unions (#666)
graphql-rust/juniper: docs/book/content/types/unions.md

Unions
======

From a server's point of view, [GraphQL unions][1] are similar to interfaces: the only exception is that they don't contain fields on their own.

For implementing [GraphQL union][1] Juniper provides:
- `#[derive(GraphQLUnion)]` macro for enums and structs;
- `#[graphql_union]` for traits.

## Enums

Most of the time, we need just a trivial and straightforward Rust enum to represent a [GraphQL union][1].

```rust
use derive_more::From;
use juniper::{GraphQLObject, GraphQLUnion};

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
struct Human {
    id: String,
    home_planet: String,
}

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
struct Droid {
    id: String,
    primary_function: String,
}

#[derive(From, GraphQLUnion)]
enum Character {
    Human(Human),
    Droid(Droid),
}
#
# fn main() {}
```

### Ignoring enum variants

> In some rare situations we may want to omit exposing enum variant in GraphQL schema.

Author: @LegNeato hmm... I tried to use `we` instead `you` everywhere to be "on the reader's side" during this "journey", rather than "command him" 🙃

If it's not OK, I'll change the style to use `you` everywhere.

> In some rare situations we may want to omit exposing enum variant in GraphQL schema.

Reviewer: Ok, that works for me.

As an example, let's consider the situation when we need to bind some type parameter for doing interesting type-level stuff in our resolvers. To achieve that, we need to carry the one with `PhantomData`, but we don't want the latest being exposed in GraphQL schema.

> __WARNING__:  
> It's _library user responsibility_ to ensure that ignored enum variant is _never_ returned from resolvers, otherwise resolving GraphQL query will __panic in runtime__.

```rust
# use std::marker::PhantomData;
use derive_more::From;
use juniper::{GraphQLObject, GraphQLUnion};

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
struct Human {
    id: String,
    home_planet: String,
}

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
struct Droid {
    id: String,
    primary_function: String,
}

#[derive(From, GraphQLUnion)]
enum Character<S> {
    Human(Human),
    Droid(Droid),
    #[from(ignore)]

>     #[graphql(ignore)]  // or `#[graphql(skip)]`, on your choice

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #[graphql(ignore)]  // or `#[graphql(skip)]`, your choice
```

    _State(PhatomData<S>),
}
#
# fn main() {}
```

### Custom resolvers

> If some custom logic should be involved to resolve a [GraphQL union][1] variant, we may specify the function responsible for that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If some custom logic is needed to resolve a [GraphQL union][1] variant, you may specify a function to do so:
```

```rust
# #![allow(dead_code)]
use juniper::{GraphQLObject, GraphQLUnion};

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
#[graphql(Context = CustomContext)]
struct Human {
    id: String,
    home_planet: String,
}

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
#[graphql(Context = CustomContext)]
struct Droid {
    id: String,
    primary_function: String,
}

pub struct CustomContext {
    droid: Droid,
}
impl juniper::Context for CustomContext {}

#[derive(GraphQLUnion)]
#[graphql(Context = CustomContext)]
enum Character {
    Human(Human),
    #[graphql(with = Character::droid_from_context)]
    Droid(Droid),
}

impl Character {

>     // NOTICE: The function signature is mandatory to accept `&self`, `&Context` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // NOTICE: The function signature must contain `&self` and `&Context` 
```

    //         and return `Option<&VariantType>`.
    fn droid_from_context<'c>(&self, ctx: &'c CustomContext) -> Option<&'c Droid> {
        Some(&ctx.droid)
    }
}
#
# fn main() {}
```

> With a custom resolver we can even declare a new [GraphQL union][1] variant, which Rust type is absent in the initial enum definition (the attribute syntax `#[graphql(on VariantType = resolver_fn)]` follows the [GraphQL syntax for dispatching union variant](https://spec.graphql.org/June2018/#example-f8163)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With a custom resolver we can even declare a new [GraphQL union][1] variant where the Rust type is absent in the initial enum definition. The attribute syntax `#[graphql(on VariantType = resolver_fn)]` follows the [GraphQL syntax for dispatching union variants](https://spec.graphql.org/June2018/#example-f8163)).
```

```rust
use juniper::{GraphQLObject, GraphQLUnion};

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
#[graphql(Context = CustomContext)]
struct Human {
    id: String,
    home_planet: String,
}

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
#[graphql(Context = CustomContext)]
struct Droid {
    id: String,
    primary_function: String,
}

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
#[graphql(Context = CustomContext)]
struct Ewok {
    id: String,
    is_funny: bool,
}

pub struct CustomContext {
    ewok: Ewok,
}
impl juniper::Context for CustomContext {}

#[derive(GraphQLUnion)]
#[graphql(Context = CustomContext)]
#[graphql(on Ewok = Character::ewok_from_context)]
enum Character {
    Human(Human),
    Droid(Droid),
}

impl Character {
    fn ewok_from_context<'c>(&self, ctx: &'c CustomContext) -> Option<&'c Ewok> {
        Some(&ctx.ewok)
    }
}
#
# fn main() {}
```

## Structs

> Using Rust structs as [GraphQL unions][1] is very similar to using enums, with the nuance that specifying custom resolver is the only way to declare a [GraphQL union][1] variant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using Rust structs as [GraphQL unions][1] is very similar to using enums, with the nuance that specifying a custom resolver is the only way to declare a [GraphQL union][1] variant.
```

Unions
======

> From a server's point of view, [GraphQL unions][1] are similar to interfaces: the only exception is that they don't contain fields on their own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the server's point of view, [GraphQL unions][1] are similar to interfaces--the only exception is that they don't contain fields on their own.
```

> For implementing [GraphQL union][1] Juniper provides:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For implementing [GraphQL unions][1] Juniper provides:
```

> - `#[derive(GraphQLUnion)]` macro for enums and structs;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `#[derive(GraphQLUnion)]` macro for enums and structs.
```

- `#[graphql_union]` for traits.

## Enums

> Most of the time, we need just a trivial and straightforward Rust enum to represent a [GraphQL union][1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the time, we just need a trivial and straightforward Rust enum to represent a [GraphQL union][1].
```

    humans: HashMap<String, Human>,
    droids: HashMap<String, Droid>,
}
impl juniper::Context for Database {}

#[derive(GraphQLUnion)]
#[graphql(
    on Human = Character::get_human,
    on Droid = Character::get_droid,
)]
struct Character {
    id: String,
}

impl Character {
    fn get_human<'db>(&self, ctx: &'db Database) -> Option<'db Human>{
        ctx.humans.get(&self.id)
    }

    fn get_droid<'db>(&self, ctx: &'db Database) -> Option<'db Human>{
        ctx.humans.get(&self.id)
    }
}
#
# fn main() {}
```

## Traits

> Sometimes it may seem very reasonable to use Rust trait for representing a [GraphQL union][1]. However, to do that, we should introduce a separate `#[graphql_union]` macro, because [Rust doesn't allow to use derive macros on traits](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/procedural-macros.html#derive-macros) at the moment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use a Rust trait definition as a [GraphQL union][1] you need to use the `#[graphql_union]` macro. [Rust doesn't allow derive macros on traits](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/procedural-macros.html#derive-macros) so using `#[derive(GraphQLUnion)]` on traits does not work.
```

> __NOTICE__:  
> A __trait has to be [object safe](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/items/traits.html#object-safety)__, because schema resolvers will need to return a [trait object](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/types/trait-object.html) to specify a [GraphQL union][1] behind it.

```rust
use juniper::{graphql_union, GraphQLObject};

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
struct Human {
    id: String,
    home_planet: String,
}

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
struct Droid {
    id: String,
    primary_function: String,
}

#[graphql_union]
trait Character {

>     // NOTICE: The function signature is mandatory to accept `&self` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // NOTICE: The function signature must contain `&self` 
```

    //         and return `Option<&VariantType>`.
    fn as_human(&self) -> Option<&Human> { None }
    fn as_droid(&self) -> Option<&Droid> { None }
}

impl Character for Human {
    fn as_human(&self) -> Option<&Human> { Some(&self) }
}

impl Character for Droid {
    fn as_droid(&self) -> Option<&Droid> { Some(&self) }
}
#
# fn main() {}
```

### Custom context

> If a context is required in trait method to resolve a [GraphQL union][1] variant, we may just specify it in arguments. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a context is required in a trait method to resolve a [GraphQL union][1] variant, specify it as an argument. 
```

    humans: HashMap<String, Human>,
    droids: HashMap<String, Droid>,
}
impl juniper::Context for Database {}

#[graphql_union(Context = Database)]
trait Character {

>     // NOTICE: The function signature, however, may optionally accept `&Context`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // NOTICE: The function signature may optionally contain `&Context`.
```

    fn as_human<'db>(&self, ctx: &'db Database) -> Option<&'db Human> { None }
    fn as_droid<'db>(&self, ctx: &'db Database) -> Option<&'db Droid> { None }
}

impl Character for Human {
    fn as_human<'db>(&self, ctx: &'db Database) -> Option<&'db Human> {
        ctx.humans.get(&self.id)
    }
}

impl Character for Droid {
    fn as_droid<'db>(&self, ctx: &'db Database) -> Option<&'db Droid> {
        ctx.droids.get(&self.id)
    }
}
#
# fn main() {}
```

### Ignoring trait methods

As with enums, we may want to omit some trait methods to be assumed as [GraphQL union][1] variants and ignore them.

```rust
use juniper::{graphql_union, GraphQLObject};

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
struct Human {
    id: String,
    home_planet: String,
}

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
struct Droid {
    id: String,
    primary_function: String,
}

#[graphql_union]
trait Character {
    fn as_human(&self) -> Option<&Human> { None }
    fn as_droid(&self) -> Option<&Droid> { None }

>     #[graphql_union(ignore)]  // or `#[graphql_union(skip)]`, on your choice

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #[graphql_union(ignore)]  // or `#[graphql_union(skip)]`, your choice
```

    fn id(&self) -> &str;
}

impl Character for Human {
    fn as_human(&self) -> Option<&Human> { Some(&self) }
    fn id(&self) -> &str { self.id.as_str() }
}

impl Character for Droid {
    fn as_droid(&self) -> Option<&Droid> { Some(&self) }
    fn id(&self) -> &str { self.id.as_str() }
}
#
# fn main() {}
```

### Custom resolvers

> And, of course, similarly to enums and structs, it's not mandatory to use trait methods as [GraphQL union][1] variants resolvers, the custom functions may be specified as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly to enums and structs, it's not mandatory to use trait methods as [GraphQL union][1] variant resolvers. and instead custom functions may be specified:
```

```rust
# use std::collections::HashMap;
use juniper::{graphql_union, GraphQLObject};

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
#[graphql(Context = Database)]
struct Human {
    id: String,
    home_planet: String,
}

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
#[graphql(Context = Database)]
struct Droid {
    id: String,
    primary_function: String,
}

struct Database {
    humans: HashMap<String, Human>,
    droids: HashMap<String, Droid>,
}
impl juniper::Context for Database {}

#[graphql_union(Context = Database)]
#[graphql_union(
    on Human = DynCharacter::get_human,
    on Droid = get_droid,
)]
trait Character {

>     #[graphql_union(ignore)]  // or `#[graphql_union(skip)]`, on your choice

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #[graphql_union(ignore)]  // or `#[graphql_union(skip)]`, your choice
```

        ctx.humans.get(&self.id)
    }
}

impl Character for Droid {
    fn as_droid<'db>(&self, ctx: &'db Database) -> Option<&'db Droid> {
        ctx.droids.get(&self.id)
    }
}
#
# fn main() {}
```

### Ignoring trait methods

As with enums, we may want to omit some trait methods to be assumed as [GraphQL union][1] variants and ignore them.

```rust
use juniper::{graphql_union, GraphQLObject};

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
struct Human {
    id: String,
    home_planet: String,
}

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
struct Droid {
    id: String,
    primary_function: String,
}

#[graphql_union]
trait Character {
    fn as_human(&self) -> Option<&Human> { None }
    fn as_droid(&self) -> Option<&Droid> { None }
    #[graphql_union(ignore)]  // or `#[graphql_union(skip)]`, your choice
    fn id(&self) -> &str;
}

impl Character for Human {
    fn as_human(&self) -> Option<&Human> { Some(&self) }
    fn id(&self) -> &str { self.id.as_str() }
}

impl Character for Droid {
    fn as_droid(&self) -> Option<&Droid> { Some(&self) }
    fn id(&self) -> &str { self.id.as_str() }
}
#
# fn main() {}
```

### External resolver functions

> Similarly to enums and structs, it's not mandatory to use trait methods as [GraphQL union][1] variant resolvers, and instead custom functions may be specified:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly to enums and structs, it's not mandatory to use trait methods as [GraphQL union][1] variant resolvers. Instead, custom functions may be specified:
```

```rust
# use std::collections::HashMap;
use juniper::{graphql_union, GraphQLObject};

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
#[graphql(Context = Database)]
struct Human {
    id: String,
    home_planet: String,
}

#[derive(GraphQLObject)]
#[graphql(Context = Database)]
struct Droid {
    id: String,
    primary_function: String,
}

struct Database {
    humans: HashMap<String, Human>,
    droids: HashMap<String, Droid>,
}
impl juniper::Context for Database {}

#[graphql_union(Context = Database)]
#[graphql_union(
    on Human = DynCharacter::get_human,
    on Droid = get_droid,
)]
trait Character {
    #[graphql_union(ignore)]  // or `#[graphql_union(skip)]`, your choice
    fn id(&self) -> &str;
}

impl Character for Human {
    fn id(&self) -> &str { self.id.as_str() }
}

impl Character for Droid {
    fn id(&self) -> &str { self.id.as_str() }
}

> // Used trait object is always `Send` and `Sync`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// The trait object is always `Send` and `Sync`.
```
